My lord,
you told me you would tellthe rest,
when weeping made youbreak the story off,
of our two cousins cominginto London.
Where did I leave?
At that sad stop, my lord,
where rude, misgovernedhands from windows' tops
threw dust and rubbish onKing Richard's head.
Then, as I said, the duke,great Bolingbroke,
mounted upon a hot andfiery steed,
which his aspiring riderseemed to know,
with slow but stately pacekept on his course,
whilst all tongues cried "Godsave thee, Bolingbroke."
You would have thought thevery windows spake,
so many greedy looks ofyoung and old
through casements dartedtheir desiring eyes
upon his visage,
and that all the wallswith painted imagery
had said at once "Jesupreserve thee.
Welcome, Bolingbroke."
Whilst he, from the oneside to the other turning,
bareheaded,
lower than his proudsteed's neck,
bespake them thus:
"I thank thee,countrymen."
And thus still doing, thushe passed along.
Alack, poor Richard.
Where rode he the whilst?
As in a theatre, the eyesof men,
after a well-graced actorleaves the stage,
are idly bent on him thatenters next,
thinking his prattle to betedious.
Even so, but with muchmore contempt,
did men's eyes scowl ongentle Richard.
No man cried, "God savehim."
No joyful tongue gave himhis welcome home.
But dust was thrown uponhis sacred head,
which with such gentlesorrow he shook off,
his face still combatingwith tears and smiles,
the badges of his griefand patience,
that had not God, for somestrong purpose,
steeled the hearts of men,they must perforce havemelted,
and barbarism itself havepitied him.
But heaven hath a hand inthese events,
to whose high will webound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke we aresworn subjects now,
whose state and honor Ifor aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Aumerle that was.
But that is lost for beingRichard's friend.
And, madam, you must callhim Rutland now.
I am in parliament pledgefor his truth
and lasting fealty to thenew made king.
Welcome, my son.
Who are the violets now
that strew the green lapof the new come spring?
Madam, I know not, nor Igreatly care not.
God knows I had as lief benone as one.
Well, bear you well inthis new spring of time,
lest you be cropped beforeyou come to prime.
What news from Oxford?
Those jousts and triumphshold?
For aught I know, my lord,they do.
You will be there, I know.
If God prevent not, Ipurpose so.
What seal is that, thathangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look'st thou pale?
Let me see the writing.
My lord, 'tis nothing.
No matter, then, who seeit.
I will be satisfied.
Let me see the writing.
I do beseech Your Grace topardon me.
It is a matter of smallconsequence,
which for some reasons Iwould not have seen.
Which for some reasons,sir, I mean to see.
I fear--I fear--
What should you fear?
'Tis nothing but some bond
that he is entered intofor gay apparel againstthe triumph day.
Bound to himself.
What doth he with a bondthat he is bound to?
Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, boy, let me see thewriting.
I do beseech you, pardonme.
I may not show it.
I will be satisfied.
Let me see it, I say.
Treason.
Foul treason.
Villain.
Traitor.
Slave.
My lord, what is thematter?
Ho.
Who is within there?
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, whattreachery is here.
Why, what is it, my lord?
Bring me my boots, I say.
Saddle my horse.
Now, upon mine honor, bymy life, my troth,
I will appeach thevillain.
What is the matter?
Peace, foolish woman.
I will not peace.
What is the matter,Aumerle?
Good Mother, be content.
It is no more than my poorlife must answer.
Thy life answer.
Bring me my boots.
I will unto the king.
Strike him, Aumerle.
Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain.
Never more come in mysight.
Give me my boots, I say.
Why, York, what wilt thoudo?
Wilt thou not hide thetrespass of thine own?
Have we more sons or arewe like to have?
Is not my teeming datedrunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck myfair son from mine age
and rob me of a happymother's name?
Is he not like thee?
Is he not thine own?
Thou fond, mad woman,
wilt thou conceal thisdark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here haveta'en the sacrament
and interchangeably setdown their hands
to kill the king atOxford.
He shall be none.
We will keep him here.
Then what is that to him?
Away, fond woman.
Were he 20 times my son, Iwould appeach him.
Hadst thou groaned for himas I have done,
thou wouldst be morepitiful.
But now I know thy mind.
Thou dost suspect that I havebeen disloyal to thy bed
and that he is a bastard,not thy son.
Sweet York, sweet husband,be not of that mind.
He is as like thee as aman may be,
not like to me, or any ofmy kin, and yet I love him.
Make way, unruly woman.
After, Aumerle.
Mount thee upon his horse.
Spur post and get beforehim to the king.
I'll not be long behind.
Though I be old, I doubt notbut to ride as fast as York.
And never will I rise upfrom the ground
till Bolingbroke havepardoned thee.
Away.
Be gone.
What means our cousin that hestares and looks so wildly?
God save Your Grace.
I do beseech Your Majesty
to have some conferencewith Your Grace alone.
Withdraw yourselves andleave us here alone.
My lord!
What is the matter withour cousin now?
Forever may my knees growto the earth,
my tongue cleave to myroof within my mouth
unless a pardon ere I riseor speak.
Intended or committed wasthis fault?
If on the first, howheinous e'er it be
to win thy after love Ipardon thee.
Then give me leave that Imay turn the key
that no man enter till mytale be done.
Have thy desire.
My liege, look to thyself.
Beware.
Thou hast a traitor in thypresence there.
Villain, I'll make theesafe.
Stay thy revengeful hand.
Thou hast not cause tofear.
Open the door, or I willbreak it open.
What is the matter?
Uncle, speak.
Recover breath.
Tell us how near is dangerthat we may arm us toencounter it.
Peruse this writing
and thou shalt know thetreason that my hasteforbids me show.
Remember as thou read'stthy promise passed.
I do repent me.
Read not my name there.
My heart is notconfederate with my hand.
It was, villain, ere thyhand did set it down.
I tore it from thetraitor's bosom, king.
Fear, and not love, begetshis penitence.
Forget to pity him, lestthy pity prove
a serpent that will stingthee to the heart.
Oh, heinous, strong, andbold conspiracy.
Oh, loyal father of atreacherous son,
thou sheer, immaculate,and silver fountain
from whence this streamthrough muddy passages
hath held his current anddefiled himself,
thy overflow of goodconverts to bad,
and thy abundant goodnessshall excuse
this deadly blot in thydigressing son.
So shall my virtue be hisvice's bawd.
And he shall spend minehonor with his shame
as thriftless sons theirscraping fathers' gold.
Mine honor lives when hisdishonor dies,
or my shamed life in hisdishonor lies.
Thou kill'st me in hislife, giving him breath.
The traitor lives.
The true man's put todeath.
What ho, my liege.
For God's sake, let me in.
What shrill-voiced suppliantmakes this eager cry?
A woman, and thy aunt,great king.
'Tis I.
Speak with me.
Pity me.
Open the door.
A beggar begs that neverbegged before.
Our scene is altered froma serious thing
and now changed to "TheBeggar and the King."
My dangerous cousin, letyour mother in.
I know she's come to prayfor your foul sin.
If thou do pardonwhosoever pray,
more sins for thisforgiveness prosper may.
This festered joint cutoff, the rest rest sound.
This let alone will allthe rest confound.
Oh, king, believe not thishardhearted man.
Love loving not itselfnone other can.
Thou frantic woman, whatdost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs oncemore a traitor rear?
Sweet York, be patient.
Hear me, gentle liege.
Rise up, good Aunt.
Not yet, I thee beseech.
Forever will I walk uponmy knees
and never see day that thehappy sees
till thou give joy,
until thou bid me joy,
by pardoning Rutland, mytransgressing boy.
Unto my mother's prayers Ibend my knee.
Against them both my truejoints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive, ifthou grant any grace.
Pleads he in earnest?
Look upon his face.
His eyes do drop no tears.
His prayers are in jest.
His words come from hismouth, ours from our breast.
He prays but faintly andwould be denied.
We pray with heart andsoul and all besides.
His weary joints wouldgladly rise, I know.
Our knees shall kneel tillto the ground they grow.
His prayers are full offalse hypocrisy,
ours of true zeal and deepintegrity.
Our prayers do outprayhis.
Then let them have thatmercy that true prayerought to have.
Good Aunt, stand up.
Nay, do not say, "standup."
Say, "pardon" first, andafterwards "stand up."
And if I were thy nurse,thy tongue to teach,
"pardon" would be thefirst word of thy speech.
I never longed to hear theword till now.
Say "pardon," King.
Let pity teach thee how.
The word is short, but notso short as sweet.
No word like "pardon" forkings' mouths so meet.
Speak it in French, king.
Say, "Pardonne moi."
Dost thou teach pardonpardon to destroy?
Oh, my sour husband, myhardhearted lord,
that sets the word itselfagainst the word.
Speak "pardon" as 'tiscurrent in our land.
The chopping French we donot understand.
Thine eye begins to speak.
Set thy tongue there.
Or in thy piteous heartplant thou thine ear
that hearing how our plaintsand prayers do pierce,
pity may move thee"pardon" to rehearse.
Good Aunt, stand up.
I do not sue to stand.
Pardon is all the suit Ihave in hand.
I pardon him,
as God shall pardon me.
Oh, happy vantage of akneeling knee.
Yet am I sick for fear.
Speak it again.
Twice saying "pardon" dothnot pardon twain,
but makes one pardonstrong.
With all my heart, Ipardon him.
A god on earth thou art.
But for our trustybrother-in-law and the abbot,
with all the rest of thatconsorted crew,
destruction straight shalldog them at the heels.
Good Uncle, help to orderseveral powers to Oxford
or where'er these traitorsare.
They shall not live withinthis world, I swear,
but I will have them, if Ionce know where.
Uncle, farewell.
And, cousin, adieu.
Your mother well hathprayed and prove you true.
Come, my old son.
I pray God make thee new.
Did thou not mark theking, what words he spake?
"Have I no friend will ridme of this living fear?"
Was it not so?
These were his very words.
"Have I no friend?" quothhe.
He spake it twice andurged it twice together,did he not?
He did.
And speaking it, he wistlylooked on me
as who should say, "Iwould thou wert the man
that would divorce thisterror from my heart,"
meaning the king atPomfret.
Come, let's go.
I am the king's friend andwill rid his foe.
I have been studying how Imay compare
this prison where I liveunto the world.
And for because the worldis populous
and here is not a creaturebut myself, I cannot do it.
Yet I'll hammer it out.
My brain I'll prove thefemale to my soul,
my soul the father,
and these two beget ageneration of stillbreeding thoughts,
and these same thoughtspeople this little world
in humors like the peopleof this world,
for no thought iscontented.
The better sort, asthoughts of things divineare intermixed
with scruples and do setthe word itself againstthe word.
As thus, "Come, littleones."
And then again, "It is ashard to come as for a camel
to thread the postern of asmall needle's eye."
Thoughts tending toambition, they do plotunlikely wonders--
how these vain weak nails
may tear a passage throughthe flinty ribs
of this hard world, myragged prison walls.
And, for they cannot, diein their own pride.
Thoughts tending tocontent flatter themselves
that they are not thefirst of fortune's slaves,
nor shall not be the last.
Like silly beggars who,sitting in the stocks,
refuge their shame,
that many have and othersmust sit there.
And in this thought theyfind a kind of ease,
bearing their ownmisfortunes on the back
of such as have beforeendured the like.
Thus play I in one personmany people,
and none contented.
Sometimes am I king.
Then treasons make me wishmyself a beggar,
and so I am.
Then crushing penurypersuades me I was betterwhen a king.
Then am I kinged again,
and by and by think that Iam unkinged by Bolingbroke
and straight am nothing.
But whate'er I be,
nor I nor any man that butman is,
with nothing shall bepleased
till he be eased withbeing nothing.
Music do I hear?
Oh, keep time.
How sour sweet music is
when time is broke and noproportion kept.
So is it in the music ofmen's lives.
And here have I thedaintiness of ear
to cheque time broke in adisordered string,
but for the concord of mystate and time
had not an ear to hear mytrue time broke.
I wasted time, and nowdoth time waste me.
For now hath time made mehis numbering clock.
My thoughts are minutes.
And with sighs they jartheir watches on untomine eyes,
the outward watch,
whereto my finger, like adial's point,
is pointing still, incleansing them from tears.
Now, sir, the sound thattells what hour it is
are clamorous groans thatbeat upon my heart,
which is the bell.
So sighs and tears andgroans show minutes,times, and hours.
But my time runs posting onin Bolingbroke's proud joy,
while I stand fooling here,his Jack o' the clock.
This music mads me!
Let it sound no more!
For though it have holpmadmen to their wits,
in me it seems it willmake wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heartthat gives it me,
for 'tis a sign of love.
And love to Richard is astrange brooch in this allhating world.
Hail, royal prince.
Thanks, noble peer.
The cheapest of us is tengroats too dear.
What art thou?
And how comest thou hither
where no man never comesbut that sad dog
that brings me food tomake misfortune live?
I was a poor groom of thystable, king,
when thou wert king,
who, traveling towardsYork,
with much ado at lengthhave gotten leave
to look upon my sometimesroyal master's face.
Oh, how it yearned myheart
when I beheld in Londonstreets that coronation day
when Bolingbroke rode onroan Barbary,
that horse that thou sooften hast bestrid,
that horse that I socarefully have dressed.
Rode he on Barbary?
Tell me, gentle friend,how went he under him?
So proudly as if hedisdained the ground.
So proud that Bolingbrokewas on his back.
That jade hath eat breadfrom my royal hand.
This hand hath made himproud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble?
Would he not falldown, since pride musthave a fall,
and break the neck of thatproud man that did usurphis back?
Forgiveness, horse.
Why do I rail on thee,
since thou, created to be awedby man, wast born to bear?
I was not made a horse,
and yet I bear the burdenlike an ass,
spurred, galled, and tiredby jouncing Bolingbroke.
Fellow, give place.
Here is no longer stay.
If thou love me, 'tis timethou wert away.
What my tongue dares not,that my heart shall say.
My lord, will it pleaseyou to fall to?
Taste of it first, as thouart wont to do.
My lord, I dare not.
Sir Pierce of Exton, wholately came from the king,
commands the contrary.
The devil take Henry ofLancaster and thee.
Patience is stale, and Iam weary of it.
Help!
How now.
What means death in thisrude assault?
Villain!
Thy own hand yields thydeath's instrument.
Go thou, and fill anotherroom in hell.
That hand shall burn innever quenching fire
that staggers thus myperson.
Exton, thy fierce hand
hath with the king's bloodstained the king's own land.
Mount; mount, my soul.
Thy seat is up on high,
whilst my gross flesh sinksdownward, here to die.
Kind Uncle York, thelatest news we hear
is that the rebels haveconsumed with fire
our town of Cicester inGloucestershire.
Whether they be ta'en orslain we hear not.
The grand conspirator,abbot of Westminster,
with clog of conscienceand sour melancholy,
hath yielded up his bodyto the grave.
But here is Carlisleliving
to abide thy kingly doomand sentence of his pride.
Carlisle, this is your doom.
Choose out some secretplace, some reverend room,
more than thou hast, andwith it joy thy life.
So as thou livest in peace,die free from strife.
For though mine enemy thouhast ever been,
high sparks of honor inthee have I seen.
Great king,
within this coffin Ipresent thy buried fear.
Herein all breathless lies
the mightiest of thygreatest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux,
by me hither brought.
Exton, I thank thee not,
for thou hast wrought a deedof slander with thy fatal hand
upon my head and all thisfamous land.
From your own mouth, mylord, did I this deed.
They love not poison thatdo poison need,
nor do I thee.
Though I did wish himdead,
I hate the murderer,
love him murdered.
The guilt of consciencetake thou for thy labor,
but neither my good wordnor princely favor.
With Cain go wanderthrough shades of night,
and never show thy head byday nor light.
Lords, I protest my soulis full of woe
that blood should sprinkleme to make me grow.
Come, mourn with me forwhat I do lament,
and put on sullen, blackincontinent.
I'll make a voyage to theHoly Land
to wash this blood fromoff my guilty hand.
March sadly after.
Grace my mournings here
in weeping after thisuntimely bier.